.TH blab 1 "Dec 3, 2011"
.SH NAME
blab \- a grammar-based data generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBblab\fR [ -v | -h | -V | -A ] [ -o \fIpattern\fR ] [ -e \fIstr\fR ] [ -n \fInum\fR ] [ -s \fIseed\fR ] [ -f \fIlimit\fR] [ -l \fIdir\fI ] [ \fIgrammar-path\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Blab generates data based on a given grammar. It is in effect a 
reverse parser. It accepts grammars using a simple BNF- and regular 
expression based syntax and generates outputs which would be 
parseable according to the grammar. 
.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-'), and several short options only 
last oneo of which can have an argument can be merged after a single 
dash.

A summary of essential command line flats options is included below.
The complete list is shown on the help page.
.TP
\fB\-h, \-\-help\fP Show summary of options and default values if applicable.
.TP
\fB\-v, \-\-verbose\fP Increase verbosity (use twice for maximum effect).
.TP
\fB\-A, \-\-about\fP Tell something about blab.
.TP
\fB\-V, \-\-version\fP Show version of program.
.TP
\fB\-o, \-\-output \fIoutput\fR Choose where to write the data. \fIOutput\fR is a path which may contain %n, which will be replaces with the number of the output if present, \fI-\fR to write to standard output, or \fI:<port>\fR to act as a TCP server on the given port.
.TP
\fB\-e, \-\-eval \fIgrammar\fR Generate data according to the given argument string. The format of the grammar is defined below.
.TP
\fB\-n, \-\-count \fInumber\fR Choose how many outputs to generate from the given grammar.
.TP
\fB\-s, \-\-seed \fInumber\fR Seed the random generator with the number. Giving the same seed will result in generating the same outputs in the same order. A random one is used by default.
.TP
\fB\-f, \-\-nodes \fInumber\fR Maximum number of tree nodes. Setting this lower will cause maximum output size to be reduced.
.TP
\fB\-l, \-\-library \fIpath\fR Search for definitions from the given directory. When encountering an undefined rule being or starting with the string \fIfoo\fR, blab will attempt to load a definition from \fIpath/foo.blab\fR from all given library paths. The default library location is \fI/usr/share/blab\fR.
.SH GRAMMAR
Blab reads one grammar at startup from either the string given using -e, the 
grammar-path given as argument, or standard input if none of the others were 
given. Further definitions are loaded from the libraries if there are undefined 
labels in the grammar.

The grammar format tries to merge BNF-style notation, regular expressions and 
generating both binary and textual data in the least surprising way imaginable, 
so it might be sufficient have a look at the examples below to learn the structure.

A grammar consists of a sequence of rule definitions, the first of which is the 
one Blab will use to generate the output. If there is just one rule, the name 
can be omitted.

There are three kinds of elements in grammars which generate some data, the 
last two of which are only for convenience.
.SS byte (42)
A number in the range 0 < n <= 256 causes that byte to be generated
.SS rule (slartibartfast)
A rule name causes something according to that rule to be generated. The rule has to be defined somewhere in the grammar.
.SS string ("foo")
A string surrounded by apostrphes causes the same string to be generated, apart from quotations done using \\. The data between the apostrophes has to be valid UTF-8 data. A string is semantically equal to a sequence of the corresponding bytes.
.SS character class ([a-zα-λXYZ])
A sequence of ASCII- or UTF-8 -encoded code points separated by square brackets defines a character class any one of which may be generated with equal probability. A sequence of code points can be given by separating the a lower and higher point with a dash. Notice that unlike usually in regular expressions, the sequence means the interval in ASCII (or Unicode) code points \fBnot\fR the sequence defined by Unicode collation algorithm, so for example a-z will generate lower case latin characters and not uppercase characters, greek letters and hundreds of other things the corresponding regular expression would match in a Unicode locale. Also unlike in regular expressions, giving the same character many times has an effect on the probability distribution. [aab] will generate roughly 2/3 a:s and 1/3 b:s.

There are some means of combination to make compound rules of the above.

.SS catenation (42 42 42)
A sequence of things separated by one or more whitespaces causes something described by those things to be generated in that order.
.SS union ("foo" | 42 42 | slartibartfast)
A sequence of thing catenations separated by | means only one of them will be generated at random. Union is weaker than the (implicit) catenation operation.
.SS quantifiers ("foo"+, 42*, bgeuse{3}, (42 10 | thing){10,100})
All things can be followed by a quantifier which allows repetition. As in regular expressions, a* means 0 or more a:s, a+ means 1 or more a:s, a{n} causes a to be repeated n times and a{n,m} causes a to be repeated n-m times. All of the repetitions could be built out of *, union and catenation, but the others are also convenient.
.SS libraries
It is easy to accidentally redefine a rule, especially when using grammars written by someone else. To avoid this, rules can be defined also in libraries, and referred from inside them using the usual dot notation. A library is defined like a rule, but instead of an equal sign it is followed by rule definitions within curly braces. For example:
  output = number.int (", " number.int)+ 10
  number {
   int = ("+" | "-") [1-9][0-9]*
  }
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Grammar
 term = num
      | func "(" term (", " term){1,4} ")"
      | "(" term " " op " " term ")"
 op = [-+*/]
 num = sign [0-9]+ ("" | "." [0-9]+)
 sign = "" | ("+" | "-")
 func = "min" | "max" | "prod" | "sum"
.SS Command Line
.P 
$ blab -e '97 10' # generate bytes 97 and 10, being the letters a and \\n
.P 
$ blab -e '97+ 10' # generate 1 or more a, followed by newline
.P 
$ blab -e '(97 | 98) 10' # generate a or b and newline
.P
$ blab -e '(97 | 98)* 10' # generate 0 or more a:s and b:s
.P
$ blab -e 'S = "(" S ")" | "foo" | "bar" | S " " S'  
.P
$ blab -e '"-"{80} 10 json 10' -n 1000 # make some json using the 
included library definitions
.P
$ blab -e html -o /tmp/test-%n.html -n 20 -v # make some html and 
store to numbered files
.P
More examples are by default at /usr/share/blab/
.P 
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ol (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Blab and this manual page were written by Aki Helin <aki.helin@iki.fi>.
